| Of  late use of continuous monitoring systems has gained significance in the  environmental management practices, particularly in the last decade. These  systems coupled with IT enabled tools facilitate quick analysis and follow-up  actions, as the data are available almost on real-time basis. CPCB’s National  programs on ambient air quality and water quality monitoring also emphasize increased  use of continuous systems, in addition to manual monitoring systems. Major  industrial units have also installed continuous emission, effluent and ambient  air quality systems, as specified under the Environmental Clearance and Consent  to Operate.   It  is important that a common framework is evolved to ensure that the  authenticated/validated data generated through continuous systems are available  to Pollution Control Boards. In order to discuss all relevant aspects viz.,  data transmission, calibration, validation and interpretation of data for  meaningful applications, a one-day workshop on “ Real-time Data Collection from  Continuous Monitoring Systems” was organized by Central Pollution Control Board  (CPCB) on August 6, 2014 at India Habitat Centre, New Delhi .   (Photographs of the workshop)   The workshop was divided into four sessions - Inaugural and three  technical sessions:   In the Inaugural session, Sh. J. S. Kamyotra, Dirctor, CPCB,  highlighted the need of Continuous and Online Monitoring system while Sh. A.  Sudhakar, I/c IT division, CPCB, presented the concept of continuous and online  monitoring system. The first technical session dealt with the Continuous Monitoring  Systems - Installation, Calibration & Data Generation which was chaired by Sh.  J. S. Kamyotra. In this session, Dr. D. Saha, I/c Air Lab, CPCB presented on  Real Time Emission Monitoring System while Dr. R. M. Bhardwaj, I/c PAMS  division gave presentation on Real Time Effluent Monitoring System. This was  followed by Discussions on the presentations. The second technical session dealt with Data - Transmission,  Verification and Use. The session was presided over by Sh. S SGahlout, DDG, NIC  while Sh. Prashant  Gargava and Sh. VinodBabu were the experts in the  panel. In this session, Sh. AdityaSharma, Sc.’C’, CPCB presented on Data Flow  from industries to SPCB and CPCB, Ms. Kavitha. B. V, Sc.’C’, CPCBpresentedon Verification  and presentation of Data while Sh. ChiragBhimani, DEE, Gujarat PCB gave  presentation on Interpretation and Data Use.  The post lunch session dealt with the experiences of Real-time  Data Collection in various SPCBs and the session was chaired by Sh. Kamyotra,  CPCB. In this session Sh. Thiru R. Dhanasekaran, Chief Scientific Officer,  TNPCB, Dr. A. K. Swar, SEE, OdishaPCB and Sh. Aditya Sharma, CPCB shared the  experience of real-time data collection from industries. The concluding session of workshop was chaired by Sh. J. S. Kamyotra  and Sh. A Sudhakar drew the outcome of the workshop and future road map of  Installation of continuous monitoring systems and data collection from  industries . The SPCB and CPCB officers were requested to send the suggestions  and technical feedback to CPCB at aditya.cpcb@nic.in or Kavitha.cpcb@nic.inby  August 20, 2014. It was also proposed to  bring out ‘General Guidelines for Continuous Monitoring Systems’ by CPCB in two  months. |