For many people, one of the best parts of warm weather is being able to go outside to run, bike, hike – doing anything that lets you enjoy the weather and move your body. Unfortunately, high air pollution levels can have harmful effects on your lungs and keep you indoors. Here are some tips to keep your lungs healthy this season.
1. Learn about the Air Quality in Your Area
Before exercising outdoors, check the air quality index (AQI) to make sure that your local air quality is safe. The AQI is a rating system that measures the severity of pollution in the air on a scale from 0 to 500. The complex calculation is created by measuring five major pollutants: ground-level ozone, particulate matter (PM2.5), carbon monoxide, nitrogen dioxide and sulfur dioxide. If the AQI value is 50 or under, it is considered a good air quality day and it is safe for everyone to spend time outdoors without posing a risk to their health. As the AQI number increases, however, so does the risk to health. An AQI over 300 is considered hazardous and everyone should remain indoors. We will break down the levels in the middle and what they mean in this article. You can use local media, air quality apps or Airnow.gov to check your daily air quality and can even sign up for alerts.
If you want more information on whether your local air quality makes the grade overall, the American Lung Association's annual "State of the Air" report grades counties and ranks cities based on their ozone and particle pollution over a three-year period. The report notes the cleanest cities for air pollution and those with the highest pollution levels, which allows you to be prepared long-term.
2. Be Flexible and Make Adjustments to Your Workout
The type of exercise, the time of day you work out and the type of pollutant in the air can all affect your exposure to unhealthy air. Summertime brings prime weather for ozone (also known as smog), an invisible air pollutant. Ozone levels are often higher in the afternoon, when it is hotter, and prolonged activities that cause you to breathe in more air at a faster rate increase your exposure. If you are a healthy adult and have plans to go for a long run or strenuous hike, check the air quality forecast ahead of time to see what the air will be like that day. If there is an AQI of 101 or more, shown on the AQI chart as a code orange, plan to go in the morning or choose a lighter activity, such as going for a walk or a casual bike ride. If the air quality forecast predicts code red (AQI of 151) or higher, move your exercise indoors.
Regardless of the air pollution levels, you should always avoid exercising near highways or heavy traffic, as vehicles are a major source of pollution. Experts recommend being 350 to 600 yards away from major highways, which rules out paths and sidewalks along those areas.
3. Sensitive Groups Should Take Extra Caution
While everyone is at risk of the harms of air pollution, certain people are more vulnerable to the health impacts of air pollution. These sensitive groups include children under 18, adults over 65, people with chronic heart or lung disease, people who are pregnant and people with diabetes. People who are active outdoors, including outdoor workers and avid exercisers, can be considered at higher risk as well because of prolonged exposure. People who are a part of any of these high-risk groups are often the first to feel the effects of ozone and particle pollution, so they need to take extra steps to protect themselves from harm. For instance, they should consider limiting their outdoor activities on any days that aren’t code green, or with an AQI of 50 or under. Similarly, any days that are AQI of 100 or above should be days they shift their exercise and other activities indoors. Talk to your healthcare provider about the types of activities you enjoy and the best strategies to keep your lungs healthy during days of poor air quality.
4. Be an Advocate to Clean Up Air
Summer is a great time to enjoy the outdoors, and no one wants to be stuck inside unable to engage in outdoor activities because the air quality is unhealthy. The best way to reduce pollution is to keep it out of our air in the first place. Help clean up the air by calling on your decision-makers to support measures that reduce air pollution. Start by urging EPA Administrator Zeldin to keep power plant pollution protections in place.
Blog last updated: October 16, 2025